He had so often heard these things said that they did not strike him as original. Emma was like all his mistresses; and the charm of novelty, gradually falling away like a garment, laid bare the eternal monotony of passion, that has always the same forms and the same language. 

## BOOK TWENTY-SEVEN

He had become commonplace, and he did not feel himself any longer a match for the world.

As he walked along, examining the shop-windows, he thought with a smile of the thousand follies he had gone in for, and of the joys he had lost thereby. For he felt that he had outlived himself. His youth was over; and the ridiculous side of life amused him more than the serious. He thought it more clever to get up a joke with the landlady, or to have a tiff with the clerk. But he had reached that stage when, to get over one's boredom, one must needs have all one's faculties awake. He would have liked to have another love affair. Emma was enough for him, but he wanted something else. It would be easy to find it, if one knew where to look for it.

One fine day, he was invited to the house of the Vicomte de Noares. He went there; and on the following day he went again.

One of the two ladies of the house, who came in, addressed him in a low voice:

'The Comte de Faverges wishes to know whether you are going to the ball this evening.'

He went back to his hotel.

In the evening, when he came out, he thought he recognized the Comte de Faverges on the boulevard.

He felt a sort of spasm in his heart, and was seized with a desire to speak to him.

The count came up to him, and in a few words, politely, asked him to come and have a glass of wine with him.

They went into a private room.

The count, in his turn, inquired about the countess, and in a friendly way talked about their children.

'You have no doubt seen her?'

'Yes, a little.'

'She is a charming woman.'

He spoke of her with affectionate admiration, and appeared to think her very beautiful. He had a great admiration for women of her class.

Then he launched out into a conversation about their neighbours, with a view to introducing the subject.

Charles replied vaguely, and then fell back on the ordinary topics of conversation.

He did not like the count. His figure was not imposing; he had the air of a clerk, and his conversation was commonplace.

They parted with mutual civilities.

But in the morning, at his hotel, Charles could not get over his excitement.

He went to the ball.

The crowd filled the large, lofty rooms, in which were three rows of mirrors, and on a level with the mirrors, the dresses. The lamps in their candelabra made yellow squares on the white walls. There was a rustling of silk, and a fluttering of fans. The footmen were in their livery. The women were dazzlingly beautiful. They were all fair, with big eyes, large pouts, and scarfs of Venetian point. They were very light on their feet, swayed gracefully, and in the mazes of the quadrilles looked round with coquettish glances.

Charles was seated on a chair by the door. He had put on his gloves, and was leaning back with his legs crossed, looking on the dancers.

Suddenly a woman of his own age came up to him. She wore a large fan, with a little handle in the shape of a snake.

'Ah! my dear, you here!'

And she began chattering in a very loud voice, without taking her eyes off him.

She was one of those women who have nothing about them of the woman. She was like a pouter pigeon, with a broad nose, a thick mouth, and a bony chin. Her face was flushed; her dress, which was of white muslin, was so tight that the tip of her little finger disappeared; and her hair, in a huge net, was held up by a fillet. She was showing off before him.



---------------------------------------



He had so often heard these things said that they did not strike him as original. Emma was like all his mistresses; and the charm of novelty, gradually falling away like a garment, laid bare the eternal monotony of passion, that has always the same forms and the same language. 

## BOOK EIGHT

* * *

### CHAPTER I

If she were my wife, I should be happy.

THE next day was the last before the wedding. The furniture was going to be sent from Yonville, and at eight o'clock in the morning Emma was to be at her mother's, where she was to sleep until the evening. She had spent the night at her lover's house, had eaten the chicken at Yonville, and now she was to be carried back to her father's home, and on the following day was to be married.

At half-past six she was at the barrier, and, with a ticket for Pont-l'Evêque, took her place in the diligence, which set off.

The country through which they were passing was flat, and on either side stretched the pale sky with its low white clouds, now broken by the black masses of trees. Emma had her face towards the window. Her head was bent forward and her eyes were half closed.

She was returning to her family, to the life she had been leading for so long, to the happiness that she had dreamed of and dreaded. She was returning to her mother, to the customs and the beliefs of which she had been the idol, to the affectionate, familiar talk, the great fires on winter nights, the curé who had come to dinner, the wedding-dinner with its two courses, the coach and the four horses, the paternal embraces, the money that was spent for the house, the furniture that was bought, the linen that was laid out, the display of luxury in the dining-room, the Sunday parties, the display of linen in the bedrooms, the accounts of the week, the bills of the month, the little presents at Christmas, the feast of Easter, the death of the old Marquis, the birth of the new one, the visits, the invitations, the parades, the endless round of functions, habits, acquaintances, visitors, talk, meals, toilets, without counting the prayers said in the evening, the kisses of the family, the warmth of the fires, the odour of the rooms, the sense of the domestic life that was going on.

She was returning to all this, and she would never more see anything of it, would never see her mother again, would never hear again the 'Here you are, my girl,' the 'Good-night, my dear,' or the kisses on her forehead, or feel again the softness of the bed-coverings, or the breath of the fire in the winter evenings, or the smell of the furniture, the sound of the chairs, or the odour of the dressing-gown, or the sense of the room, the family, the whole life.

She felt herself being carried away by the motion of the vehicle, and she closed her eyes.

The lights in the village had just gone out. The trees of the avenue were black, and the only light that shone was in the open door of the inn. The diligence stopped. She jumped down.

She was at home.

The footman opened the door. She asked for her mother. The servant replied that Madame was not there. She entered the dining-room.

Her father was not there. The servant did not know where he was.

She went up to her room, threw herself on her knees in front of the bed, and began to weep bitterly.

Then she went to her mother's room. It was empty. She came back, and was going out, when she saw in the passage a light through the window of the library. She entered.



------------------------------


Elisa was feeling particularly adventurous yesterday. The fine weather
had tempted her to take a little stroll in the woods.

She had passed before the windows of the château, and had seen Monsieur
and Madame Moreau in their drawing-room. They were standing near each
other, looking at the pictures on the wall. The mother was trying to
imitate the colouring of the canvases, and the father, with his cigar
between his lips, was contemplating the pretty landscape.

As soon as they perceived Elisa, they went up to her.

Madame Moreau wore a black dress with a blue stripe; her head was
covered with a velvet cap, and a long wreath of yellow roses, with
silver leaves, circled her temples.

Her husband was in a grey frock-coat, with trousers of the same colour,
and a white waistcoat with little spots of blue. His white cravat was
fastened by a large diamond pin, and he wore a silver-gilt cane, with
two ivory handles.

'Ah! so you have come back?' said the lady, smiling. 'It is a long time 
(gptj6b) celso@hero:~/work/gptneo6b$ python teste3.py 
Setting `pad_token_id` to `eos_token_id`:50256 for open-end generation.
 Elisa was feeling particularly adventurous yesterday. The fine weather
had tempted her to take a little stroll in the woods.

She had passed before the windows of the château, and had seen Monsieur
and Madame Moreau in their drawing-room. They were standing near each
other, looking at the pictures on the wall. The mother was trying to
imitate the colouring of the canvases, and the father, with his cigar
between his lips, was contemplating the pretty landscape.

As soon as they perceived Elisa, they went up to her.

Madame Moreau wore a black dress with a blue stripe; her head was
covered with a velvet cap, and a long wreath of yellow roses, with
silver leaves, circled her temples.

Her husband was in a grey frock-coat, with trousers of the same colour,
and a white waistcoat with little spots of blue. His white cravat was
fastened by a large diamond pin, and he wore a silver-gilt cane, with
two ivory handles.

'Ah! so you have come back?' said the lady, smiling. 'It is a long time



--------------------------------


ulie had a look of hesitating between two things, and of some desire to do them both at once.

She felt a vague longing for a kiss, a long one, but she was not sure
whether she wanted it or not. Then she would have liked to go and sit
down somewhere on the grass, to throw her head back, and look up at the
sky.

'Come,' said Charles, 'we will go and sit down under the willows.'

The little paths of the wood were deserted. The thickets were full of
air, with a sharp smell of leaves and moss. They sat down in a spot
covered with grey moss, in the shade of a bush.

'Ah! how delicious it is to be here!' said the young woman.

And she was really in the seventh heaven. She gazed about her,
dreaming, with a soft smile on her lips, and she felt an undefined

(gptj6b) celso@hero:~/work/gptneo6b$ python teste3.py 
Setting `pad_token_id` to `eos_token_id`:50256 for open-end generation.
Elisa was feeling particularly adventurous yesterday.

She had got out of the habit of walking in the country; and, for the
first time in her life, she was stepping out briskly along the
high-road.

She had just turned round the corner of a wall, when a man sprang
forward.

'Good heavens! a robber!'

But he was only a mason. He showed her the way, told her the name of
the place, and offered to accompany her.

The paving stones were covered with little green moss.

The clouds were passing across the sky, the wind was blowing; and
Elisa was enjoying herself. She had no wish to return home.

The mason went on talking.

'I have two children; the eldest is a child. I work for a bricklayer;
and I’m doing very well.'

They had now reached the village. The houses were all shut up. The
place seemed deserted.

Elisa, however, was surprised at seeing a man in a red cap sitting on

(gptj6b) celso@hero:~/work/gptneo6b$ python teste3.py 
Setting `pad_token_id` to `eos_token_id`:50256 for open-end generation.
Elisa was feeling particularly adventurous yesterday. The fine weather
had tempted her to take a little stroll in the woods.

She had passed before the windows of the château, and had seen Monsieur
and Madame Moreau in their drawing-room. They were standing near each
other, looking at the pictures on the wall. The mother was trying to
imitate the colouring of the canvases, and the father, with his cigar
between his lips, was contemplating the pretty landscape.

As soon as they perceived Elisa, they went up to her.

Madame Moreau wore a black dress with a blue stripe; her head was
covered with a velvet cap, and a long wreath of yellow roses, with
silver leaves, circled her temples.

Her husband was in a grey frock-coat, with trousers of the same colour,
and a white waistcoat with little spots of blue. His white cravat was
fastened by a large diamond pin, and he wore a silver-gilt cane, with
two ivory handles.

'Ah! so you have come back?' said the lady, smiling. 'It is a long time

